{% extends 'base.md' %}

{% block page %}1.4 Definition of a LETSystem{% endblock %}

{% block content %}


####Account-Holders' Agreements

A LETSystem, Local Exchange Trading System, is a self-regulating 
network  which allows its users to issue and manage their own money 
supply within the boundaries of the network.

The LETSystem accounting service maintains a system of accounts for its 
users.

####Essential Characteristics

A LETSystem has the following essential characteristics: 

1. A service in the community.

Administrative costs are recovered, in the internal currency, from each 
account according to the cost of the service. The system operates on a not-
for-profit basis.

2. Consent is required at all times

There is never any obligation to trade. 

It is the account-holders who have control over the movement of money 
out of their accounts. The administration can only act on the instructions of 
the account-holder who is making payment.

All accounts start at zero, no money is deposited or issued. 

3. Key information is available to all account-holders.

Any account-holder may know the balance (the degree of commitment) 
and trading volume (the level of participation) of any other account on the 
system. 

4. A convenient measure

The unit of account is a measure equivalent to the pound sterling. 

5. Your money belongs to you

Your money is personal, in every way your own money. No interest is 
charged or paid on balances. 


A personal money network that adopts all the above criteria and 
agreements is a LETSystem.

####Account-Holders' Agreements

 1) A LETSystem is based on the free association of individuals (the users) 
who take out accounts on the system. The LETSystem Registry provides a 
service which allows account-holders to exchange information to support 
trading, and maintains such accounts of that trading as users request. 

The account-holders delegate the maintenance of these accounts to the 
Recording Co-ordinators. The account-holders also delegate 
responsibilities to Stewards as stated in this agreement. 

2) Account-holders shall be willing to consider using their accounts in 
.......... (name of LETSystem) to trade with each other.

3) The Recording Co-ordinators will transfer money from one user's 
account to that of another only on the authority of the account-holder 
making payment. 

4) The LETSystem Stewards may instruct the Recording Co-ordinators to 
decline to record an acknowledgement considered inappropriate. 

 5) The unit of exchange is a measure equivalent to the pound sterling. 

 6) An account-holder may know the balance and trading volume of any 
other account-holder.

 7)a) Accountability for taxes incurred by users is the obligation of those 
involved in an exchange; the LETSystem Registry and its agents, including 
the Recording co-ordinators and Stewards, have no authority, nor liability, 
nor obligation to report to taxation authorities or to collect taxes on their 
behalf.

b) No warranty or undertaking as to value, condition, or quality of the 
items exchanged is expressed or implied by virtue of the introduction of 
users to each other.

c) Account-holders agree to the recording of any information that they 
supply and to the holding of all such information on computer. While all 
information, excepting balance and turnover of accounts, is considered 
confidential, neither the LETSystem Registry nor its agents can guarantee 
that confidentiality, or necessarily be held liable for any breach of it, once 
it has been legitimately disclosed. 

 8) Recording Co-ordinator(s) are authorised to levy charges on users' 
accounts in .............. (name of internal currency) at rates assessed by the Registry 
Steward(s) in liaison with the Recording Co-ordinator(s). 

Signed: ......................................

Date:  .......................


{% endblock content %}

{% block paper_no %}1.4{% endblock %}

