{% extends 'base.md' %}

{% block page %}5.1 LETSystem Development Strategy{% endblock %}

{% block content %}

####Summary

The LETSystem is now clearly demonstrated, but it has a 
much wider application than has been achieved so far. This 
section outlines proposals for systems development, 
emphasising the following points.

* Further organisation is necessary for systems to realise 
their full potential. We propose organisation for 
development on a regional basis. Organisation needs to 
ensure that efforts are co-ordinated and that those who 
do the work share equitably in the rewards.

* We need to bring business into LETSystems so that 
individuals, businesses and the entire community can 
share the benefits. 

* Business donations provide a source of finance 

This section is based on material written by Michael Linton 
and published in Australia during the summer of 1993. It 
was prefaced with the following comments on LETSystem 
development:

"On the one hand, there are all sorts of developments in 
place. However, there is still as yet not much financing, and 
so not many people able to devote a great deal of time or 
other resources to this, and thus, regrettably, not as much 
real result is emerging as we really need to see. Hence we 
presently face a serious risk of being overrun by others with 
perhaps less purpose and/or ethical scruples, but more 
money and organisation." 

####A matter of organisation

All the pieces are more or less in place. The LETSystem 
itself is clearly demonstrated. It functions in many different 
forms - small scale and large, community based or 
commercial, accounted in sterling or hours, with competent 
and even with incompetent administration, it works, it 
survives. Sometimes it even pays its way.

So now what? So now the next level.

Given that the appeal, and indeed the need, is universal, and 
that the system is stable within any reasonable limits, there is 
a clear opportunity.  And a responsibility.

If the social and ecological components of our planetary 
process were to hold together long enough, LETSystems in 
various forms would eventually become commonplace, 
without much significant effort from any of us. Just because 
the process is powerfully contagious, and largely irresistible.

However there is little hope that the social and ecological 
context can hold together that long.  The very pattern of 
conventional money trading is destroying our world, and far 
faster than all the efforts of all those dedicated to arresting or 
modifying the process.

LETSystems must become mainstream very soon if we are to 
have any hope of leaving to future generations a world in 
which they can even survive, much less thrive.

So what do we have to do?  Basically, we have to get our 
acts together; we have to start behaving as though this were a 
matter of life or death, which it very probably is.  That 
doesn't so much mean working harder - some of us are 
already putting everything we have into this.  It does mean is 
that we have to work smarter - and that more of us have to 
get to work.

We have to start applying the lessons of the LETSystem to 
our work on the LETSystem. And the most important lesson 
is simply this - that organization matters.  LETSystems don't 
depend primarily on how people are, as individual actors; 
they depend on how people connect and interact.

It will not serve us to continue to suppose that, and act as 
though, the manner in which we manage our LETSystems is 
merely a matter of local style and preference. Clearly, some 
arrangements are effective, some are not - and some are 
entirely detrimental.  It is proof of the extraordinary resilience 
of the LETSystem concept that it survives almost all of our 
often misguided efforts on its behalf. To rephrase an old line - 
the operation was a failure, but the patient lives.

Let's get organised so that our development programs are 
aimed at realistic ends.

####Organising for development

It seems obvious that multi-system registries are the 
inevitable outcome in the long term, and that communities 
will typically be supported by several independent and yet 
co-operative registries. Certainly cities will have at least as 
many registries as there are defineable localities, and rural 
bioregions will be similarly differentated.

Yet clearly the efforts that people apply in one locality to 
establish their LETSystems will directly affect growth and 
development in those of their neighbours. Thus there is a 
clear need to organise so that there is some degree of group 
co-ordination of efforts throughout the region; and equally 
that there is a clearly defined process whereby those who do 
the work share equitably in the financial rewards that will 
emerge in time.

A further consideration is the need to form organizations of 
an appropriate local scale, large enough to be effective and 
well funded, and small enough to avoid becoming centralised 
and disconnected from their source - the local community.

While we must also take careful account of all ethical factors, 
and the normal considerations of prudence, there is little 
justification for acting slowly and every reason to act quickly. 
In this case the old adage applies - if you don't do it, 
somebody else will. We must act promptly and effectively to 
protect ourselves against the short term schemers who will 
very soon be attracted to the ideas of personal money and 
local currencies as means of making lots of money for 
themselves.

####Commercial activity

LETS get down to business. LETSystems for small subsets of 
society may be warm and cosy, but they won't do much to 
protect us when the great economic meltdown comes along. 
We need changes in the mainstream economy if we are to 
survive at all. And we are only going to make the necessary 
difference in how the economy works when a major 
proportion of the local population is involved. The general 
public will only take interest when they can buy groceries, 
clothes, dental services, restaurant meals etc in the local 
money.  

So we need to bring business into LETSystems. There is 
really little impediment to this. After all, money that comes 
back when you spend it is as attractive to any business as to 
any individual.

Notice how commercial "barter" organizations are growing - 
despite their exorbitant costs and the internal restrictions. The 
success of these networks is an indication of how well 
LETSystems will do when they enter the same market. Nor 
should we be in the least concerned that "commercial" 
networks will overrun LETSystems; on the contrary, we need 
expect little or no difficulty in assuming their business. 

####Administration costs and development funds

No free lunches here. Most of the systems (that I heard of) 
have trouble supporting any system development through 
administration charges. Which is good; this is how it should 
be.

Administration and development need to be clearly separated. 
In any case, operating costs must be kept low, by efficient 
procedures, to avoid any excessive drag on the system. 
People are discouraged from trading if service costs are 
perhaps 5 per cent of their trading - it can feel just like a tax. 
And for people who trade about œ20 per month, a charge of 
just a few pounds is a high percentage of trading. So, 
particularly in the beginning, when trading voluimes are low, 
it is essential that operating costs are kept low. 

Although administration is an unavoidable cost for any 
system, it's also a small cost when the system itself is small. 
Unfortunately, this is also the time when design, organization, 
development, promotion, etc., etc. is most needed, and when 
the system can least bear the load of paying for that work.  

All such development is a long term process, and should be 
related to long term revenues and sources of funding. If we 
can establish what it is we are aiming at, the scale that 
LETSystems might have in, say, 5 years, then we can design 
an approach based on the end result rather than the situation 
at the beginning.   We can be looking at £100,000 ideas 
rather than penny pinching for £100 here and £50 there.  

Also, recompense, to those noble adventurers who put their 
resources - energy, time or money - into this effort, should be 
paid from results. If development is succesful, those who do 
it should be paid; if unsuccessful, it further compounds the 
problem to pay for those efforts out of administration 
budgets.  

Since multiple systems in any area all contribute to each 
others' development, the organization should be a regionally 
based group process, using a system of group incentives 
and/or rewards. 

{% endblock content %}

{% block paper_no %}5.1{% endblock %}

