{% extends 'base.md' %}

{% block page %}6.0  Landsman Community Services{% endblock %}

{% block content %}

Landsman itself has designed its programmes of design, development and 
publication on similar lines to regional development, but with a global 
perspective 

* because it's there

* because it's time, and

* because no other organization has that capacity.

Thus, any persons or organisations active in LETSystem development are 
encouraged to submit, to Landsman, accounts of their contribution.

If these accounts are indeed considered to reflect actual and substantial 
furtherance of the directions Landsman is proposing, then the accounts are 
accepted as a record showing that person or organisation's contribution to 
the effort, and their entitlement to share of the proceeds.

To be considered, submissions must be :

* unique - not also submitted to either local or large regional

* aligned with published directions.

Contracts negotiated in advance are preferred.

Thus far, over 200 people and organizations have recorded something like 
£500,000 of contributions in one form or another - funds, equipment, 
products or materials, professional services, or simply by putting in time.

### LETSGO - a fast track project

It has been generally shown that :

1 person, undistracted, active, equipped and intent  can expect to 
register at least 2 people per day.

200 people for 50 days should be able to reach 20,000.

The activities of such a group will clearly be of benefit to the community 
in which the action takes place

The result is greatly accelerated development and an earlier achievement 
of effective local economy  etc.

The opportunity arguably justifies the allocation of some of the resources 
available.

3 million people will likely, at £100 per business, generate around £150 
million for community development - and in the process £15 million for 
LETSystem development.

If 90% of that £15 million budget is reserved for the slower, more 
conservative approach to LETSystem development generally 
recommended, then the Landsman project only fractionally reduces the 
funds available, and

Just 10% of that budget, £1.5 million, is sufficient to pay for the activities 
of 200 people for 50 days.

If a similar proportion of the overall revenue, that arising from business 
entry to the main regional LETSystem until the end of the decade, is 
likewise awarded to Landsman, then the many who have recorded 
contributions to this process over the years can be paid for their efforts.

Not likely to attract the timid, but at this stage perhaps we need more 
daring more than more discretion.

During the summer of 1994, LETSgo Manchester was established to 
demonstrate the above proposals. Documentation and further information 
is available of Landsman Community Services Ltd.

{% endblock content %}

{% block paper_no %}6.0{% endblock %}

