{% extends 'base.md' %}

{% block page %}4.2 Taxation{% endblock %}

{% block content %}

Some observers have noted that LETSystems can be used to evade 
taxation and some have drawn unwarranted conclusions. There is a 
prevalent perception that government is in some way separate from its 
community. Most people regret or resent the taxation of their production 
and few are satisfied that tax revenues are well spent. Government in turn 
seems to wage war on the community to extract its revenue. Hence we 
perpetuate a "them and us" scenario without hope of resolution.

Landsman Community Services Ltd. deplores the practice of tax evasion 
and will not knowingly lend support to persons who are thus defrauding 
their community.  It will continue to recommend to LETSystem 
administrators that they clearly advise its membership that local currency 
in no way differs from national currency in matters of taxation, and that 
persons incurring tax  liabilities through local currency trading are advised 
to make appropriate provision.

Certainly, there are ways to set up systems that effectively avoid tax. 
Some of these ways are quite legitimate. However, such systems will 
equally be avoided by business, and as such will only have a limited and 
indirect relevance to the mainstream.

We don't argue that such systems are therefore useless, or risky, or 
unethical - although some approaches do score 3 out of 3; just that fighting 
battles against governments, for whatever justification, should not obstruct 
or obscure other approaches that make the best of the current rules.

Certainly, we should work to change tax laws, but it would be a mistake to 
commit all our eggs just to that basket. Fortunately we don't have to; we 
can establish as many systems as we like. 

We will have our cake - a sensible tax structure - in the end, but we can 
also eat it and like it right now.  "I never yet turned down earnings just 
because of the tax I would have to pay.  I can live with cash taxes on local 
currency trading better than I can handle taxes with no local currency". 

It is in addition considerably more difficult to deal responsibly with issues 
of welfare and other social services - which are much more immediately 
relevant to the growth of a LETSystem - if we are seen to be resisting 
paying tax.  

####Advice to government

LETSystems are founded on the basis of community self-help and 
personal empowerment. Problems within the community are addressed by 
the community. Intervention by local and national governments will be 
necessary rarely, if at all. Since this approach is different from many other 
current initiatives, some guidelines are suggested:

**Governments SHOULD**      

* study - local currencies are going to change dramatically almost all 
aspects of government action - revenues, budgets and programs  - so 
government has a high need-to-know.
* inform internally/externally - in addition to becoming aware of the 
situation and the possibilities, governments can and should play a role in 
informing the general population, much as they do in matters of public 
safety, health care etc.
* co-operate, facilitate - in general terms, in any appropriate social change 
process, the government role should be to help it along.
* underwrite, guarantee loans - financial support can legitimately be 
provided through programs of loan guarantees, in support of system 
development, but NOT system operation; conventional lenders (banks 
etc) have not yet shown much interest in  supporting these ideas. 
* exempt (partially) earnings of welfare claimants - present social security 
arrangements discriminate against claimants who participate in local 
currencies, in that they generally lose a £ of benefit for every £ they 
earn; sliding scales should be implemented, relating on a local basis to 
the extent to which "local" earnings can actually be spent to meet 
statutory needs. 
* participate - governments are obliged to perform their function 
efficiently, using the tools available; local currencies are available
* accept taxes - no good reason not to.
* internalize - the interactions of different departments within any 
organization, private or public, can be supported by internal currency 
system
* plan - draw up capital budgets for infrastructure, respond with changes in 
ongoing program financing.
* issue bonds - government may not directly issue money, but, much as 
they borrow "normal" money, they can in some circumstances borrow 
local currency
* review economic development and trade strategy - governments should 
reappraise their position on "growth-and-export-or-die" policies. The 
"lean and mean competitive global market" is a dangerous solution to 
the current problems. There are better ways to go.

**Governments SHOULD NOT**      

* panic - the first response in crisis
* overlook - “if we don't think about it it isn't there”.
* resist, fight  - quite useless, if you are surrounded.
* remain ignorant - very expensive, much more so than getting informed.

**NOR SHOULD THEY**   

* start systems - it isn't appropriate to get involved, and direct action will 
likely be viewed with great suspicion.   
* make grants, subsidise - LETSystems are inherently profitable, if 
properly operated, and it does not serve to support inefficiency; there 
are better ways to provide financial support..
* commit - governments may NOT issue local money, since they are, in all 
relevant respects, "irresponsible" institutions (no-one can guarantee to 
keep their promises)
* dominate - government accounts could easily become the highest volume 
traders in any system and might thus tend to skew and destabilize; the 
prohibition against commitment by government will reduce this risk, as 
they can only spend what they are given, but even with this limitation, 
LETSystem stewards must be wary.

{% endblock content %}

{% block paper_no %}4.2{% endblock %}

